Agoraphobia is a fear of being in situations where escape might be difficult or that help wouldn't be available if things go wrong.

Many people assume agoraphobia is simply a fear of open spaces, but it's actually a more complex condition.

Someone with agoraphobia may be scared of:

travelling on public transport
visiting a shopping centre
leaving home
If someone with agoraphobia finds themselves in a stressful situation, they'll usually experience the symptoms of a panic attack, such as:

rapid heartbeat
rapid breathing (hyperventilating)
feeling hot and sweaty
feeling sick
They'll avoid situations that cause anxiety and may only leave the house with a friend or partner. They'll order groceries online rather than going to the supermarket. This change in behaviour is known as avoidance.

Read more about the symptoms of agoraphobia.

What causes agoraphobia?
Agoraphobia can develop as a complication of panic disorder, an anxiety disorder involving panic attacks and moments of intense fear. It can arise by associating panic attacks with the places or situations where they occurred and then avoiding them.

Not all people with agoraphobia have a history of panic attacks. In these cases, their fear may be related to issues like a fear of crime, terrorism, illness or being in an accident.

Read more about the possible causes of agoraphobia.

Diagnosing agoraphobia
Speak to your GP if you think you may be affected by agoraphobia. It should be possible to arrange a telephone consultation if you don't feel ready to visit your GP in person.

Your GP will ask you to describe your symptoms, how often they occur, and in what situations. It's very important you tell them how you've been feeling and how your symptoms are affecting you.

Your GP may ask you the following questions:

Do you find leaving the house stressful?
Are there certain places or situations you have to avoid?
Do you have any avoidance strategies to help you cope with your symptoms, such as relying on others to shop for you?
It can sometimes be difficult to talk about your feelings, emotions, and personal life, but try not to feel anxious or embarrassed. Your GP needs to know as much as possible about your symptoms to make the correct diagnosis and recommend the most appropriate treatment.

Read more about diagnosing agoraphobia.

Treating agoraphobia
Lifestyle changes may help, including taking regular exercise, eating more healthily, and avoiding alcohol, drugs and drinks that contain caffeine, such as tea, coffee and cola.

Self-help techniques that can help during a panic attack include staying where you are, focusing on something that's non-threatening and visible, and slow, deep breathing.

If your agoraphobia fails to respond to these treatment methods, see your GP.

You can also refer yourself directly for talking therapies, including cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), without seeing your GP.

Read more about talking therapies on the NHS

If you’re under 18, or want to get help for someone under 18, find out how to get mental health support for children and young people.

Medication may be recommended if self-help techniques and lifestyle changes aren't effective in controlling your symptoms. You'll usually be prescribed a course of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which are also used to treat anxiety and depression.

In severe cases of agoraphobia, medication can be used in combination with other types of treatment, such as CBT and relaxation therapy.

Symptoms - Agoraphobia
The severity of agoraphobia can vary significantly between individuals.

For example, someone with severe agoraphobia may be unable to leave the house, whereas someone who has mild agoraphobia may be able to travel short distances without problems.

The symptoms of agoraphobia can be broadly classified into 3 types:

physical
cognitive
behavioural
Physical symptoms
The physical symptoms of agoraphobia usually only occur when you find yourself in a situation or environment that causes anxiety.

However, many people with agoraphobia rarely experience physical symptoms because they deliberately avoid situations that make them anxious.

The physical symptoms of agoraphobia can be similar to those of a panic attack and may include:

rapid heartbeat
rapid breathing (hyperventilating)
feeling hot and sweaty
feeling sick
chest pain
difficulty swallowing (dysphagia)
diarrhoea
trembling
dizziness
ringing in the ears (tinnitus)
feeling faint
Cognitive symptoms
The cognitive symptoms of agoraphobia are feelings or thoughts that can be, but aren't always, related to the physical symptoms.

Cognitive symptoms may include fear that:

a panic attack will make you look stupid or feel embarrassed in front of other people
a panic attack will be life threatening – for example, you may be worried your heart will stop or you'll be unable to breathe
you would be unable to escape from a place or situation if you were to have a panic attack
you're losing your sanity
you may lose control in public
you may tremble and blush in front of people
people may stare at you
There are also psychological symptoms that aren't related to panic attacks, such as:

feeling you would be unable to function or survive without the help of others
a fear of being left alone in your house (monophobia)
a general feeling of anxiety or dread
Behavioural symptoms
Symptoms of agoraphobia relating to behaviour include:

avoiding situations that could lead to panic attacks, such as crowded places, public transport and queues
being housebound – not being able to leave the house for long periods of time
needing to be with someone you trust when going anywhere
avoiding being far away from home
Some people are able to force themselves to confront uncomfortable situations, but they feel considerable fear and anxiety while doing so.

Causes - Agoraphobia
Agoraphobia can develop as a complication of panic disorder.

Agoraphobia can sometimes develop if a person has a panic attack in a specific situation or environment.

They begin to worry so much about having another panic attack that they feel the symptoms of a panic attack returning when they're in a similar situation or environment.

This causes the person to avoid that particular situation or environment.

Panic disorder
As with many mental health conditions, the exact cause of panic disorder isn't fully understood.

However, most experts think a combination of biological and psychological factors may be involved.

Biological factors
'Fight or flight' response
Panic disorder is closely associated with your body's natural "fight or flight" response – its way of protecting you from stressful and dangerous situations.

Anxiety and fear cause your body to release hormones, such as adrenaline, and your breathing and heart rate are increased. This is your body's natural way of preparing itself for a dangerous or stressful situation.

In people with panic disorder, it's thought the fight or flight response is more intense, resulting in a panic attack.

Psychological factors
Psychological factors that increase your risk of developing agoraphobia include: 

a traumatic childhood experience, such as the death of a parent or being sexually abused
experiencing a stressful event, such as bereavement, divorce, or losing your job
a previous history of mental illnesses, such as depression, anorexia nervosa or bulimia
alcohol misuse or drug misuse
being in an unhappy relationship, or in a relationship where your partner is very controlling
Agoraphobia without panic disorder
Occasionally, a person can develop symptoms of agoraphobia even though they don't have a history of panic disorder or panic attacks.

This type of agoraphobia can be triggered by a number of different irrational fears (phobias), such as the fear of:

being a victim of violent crime or a terrorist attack if you leave your house
becoming infected by a serious illness if you visit crowded places
doing something by accident that will result in you embarrassing or humiliating yourself in front of others.

Diagnosis - Agoraphobia
Speak to your GP if you think you have agoraphobia.

If you're unable to visit your GP in person, it should be possible to arrange a telephone consultation.

Your GP will ask you to describe your symptoms, how often they occur, and in what situations. It's very important to tell your GP about how you've been feeling and how your symptoms are affecting you.

They'll also want to know how your symptoms are affecting your daily behaviour. For example, they may ask:

Do you find it stressful leaving the house?
Are there certain places or situations you have to avoid?
Have you adopted any avoidance strategies to help cope with your symptoms, such as relying on others to shop for you?
It can be difficult to talk to someone else about your feelings, emotions and personal life, but try not to feel anxious or embarrassed. Your GP needs to know as much as possible about your symptoms to make the correct diagnosis and recommend the most appropriate treatment.

Physical examination
Your GP may want to do a physical examination, and in some cases they may decide to carry out blood tests to look for signs of any physical conditions that could be causing your symptoms.

For example, an overactive thyroid gland (hyperthyroidism) can sometimes cause symptoms that are similar to the symptoms of a panic attack.

By ruling out any underlying medical conditions, your GP will be able to make the correct diagnosis.

Confirming the diagnosis
A diagnosis of agoraphobia can usually be made if:

you're anxious about being in a place or situation where escape or help may be difficult if you feel panicky or have a panic attack, such as in a crowd or on a bus
you avoid situations described above, or endure them with extreme anxiety or the help of a companion
there's no other underlying condition that may explain your symptoms
If there's any doubt about the diagnosis, you may be referred to a psychiatrist for a more detailed assessment.

Treatment - Agoraphobia
A stepped approach is usually recommended for treating agoraphobia and any underlying panic disorder.

The steps are as follows:

Find out more about your condition, the lifestyle changes you can make, and self-help techniques to help relieve symptoms.
Enrol yourself on a guided self-help programme.
Undertake more intensive treatments, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), or see if your symptoms can be controlled using medicine.
Self-help techniques and lifestyle changes
Learning more about agoraphobia and its association with panic disorder and panic attacks may help you control your symptoms better.

For example, there are techniques you can use during a panic attack to bring your emotions under control. 

Having more confidence in controlling your emotions may make you more confident coping with previously uncomfortable situations and environments.

Stay where you are – try to resist the urge to run to a place of safety during a panic attack; if you're driving, pull over and park where it's safe to do so.
Focus – it's important for you to focus on something non-threatening and visible, such as the time passing on your watch, or items in a supermarket; remind yourself the frightening thoughts and sensations are a sign of panic and will eventually pass.
Breathe slowly and deeply – feelings of panic and anxiety can get worse if you breathe too quickly; try to focus on slow, deep breathing while counting slowly to 3 on each breath in and out.
Challenge your fear – try to work out what it is you fear and challenge it; you can achieve this by constantly reminding yourself that what you fear is not real and will pass.
Creative visualisation – during a panic attack, try to resist the urge to think negative thoughts, such as "disaster"; instead, think of a place or situation that makes you feel peaceful, relaxed or at ease: once you have this image in your mind, try to focus your attention on it.
Do not fight an attack – trying to fight the symptoms of a panic attack can often make things worse; instead, reassure yourself by accepting that although it may seem embarrassing and your symptoms may be difficult to deal with, the attack is not life threatening.
Making some lifestyle changes can also help. For example, ensure you:

take regular exercise – exercise can help relieve stress and tension and improve your mood
have a healthy diet – a healthy, balanced diet and weight can help maintain overall health
avoid using drugs and alcohol – they may provide short-term relief, but in the long term they can make symptoms worse
avoid drinks containing caffeine, such as tea, coffee or cola – caffeine has a stimulant effect and can make your symptoms worse
Talking therapies
If your symptoms do not respond to self-help techniques and lifestyle changes, your GP may suggest trying a talking therapy.

If you prefer, you can refer yourself directly for talking therapies, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), without seeing your GP.

Find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression

Read more about talking therapies on the NHS.

If you’re under 18, or want to get help for someone under 18, find out how to get mental health support for children and young people.

Guided self-help
With guided self-help you work through a CBT-based workbook or computer course with the support of a therapist.

The therapist works with you to understand your problems and make positive changes in your life.

Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is based on the idea that unhelpful and unrealistic thinking leads to negative behaviour.

CBT aims to break this cycle and find new ways of thinking that can help you behave more positively. For example, many people with agoraphobia have the unrealistic thought that if they have a panic attack it will kill them.

The CBT therapist will try to encourage a more positive way of thinking – for example, although having a panic attack may be unpleasant, it is not fatal and will pass.

This shift in thinking can lead to more positive behaviour in terms of a person being more willing to confront situations that previously scared them.

CBT is usually combined with exposure therapy. Your therapist will set relatively modest goals at the start of treatment, such as going to your local corner shop.

As you become more confident, more challenging goals can be set, such as going to a large supermarket or having a meal in a busy restaurant.

A course of CBT usually consists of 12 to 15 weekly sessions, with each session lasting about an hour.

Applied relaxation
Applied relaxation is based on the premise that people with agoraphobia and related panic disorder have lost their ability to relax. The aim of applied relaxation is therefore to teach you how to relax.

This is achieved using a series of exercises designed to teach you how to:

spot the signs and feelings of tension
relax your muscles to relieve tension
use these techniques in stressful or everyday situations to prevent you feeling tense and panicky
As with CBT, a course of applied relaxation therapy consists of 12 to 15 weekly sessions, with each session lasting about an hour.

Medicine
Sometimes medicine can be used as a sole treatment for agoraphobia. In more severe cases, it can also be used in combination with CBT or applied relaxation therapy.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
If medicine is recommended for you, you'll usually be prescribed a course of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs).

SSRIs were originally developed to treat depression, but they've also proved effective for helping treat other mood disorders, such as anxiety, feelings of panic, and obsessional thoughts.

An SSRI called sertraline is usually recommended for people with agoraphobia. Side effects associated with sertraline include:

feeling sick
loss of sex drive (libido)
blurred vision
diarrhoea or constipation
feeling agitated or shaky
excessive sweating
These side effects should improve over time, although some can occasionally persist.

If sertraline fails to improve your symptoms, you may be prescribed an alternative SSRI or a similar type of medicine known as serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors (SNRIs).

The length of time you'll have to take an SSRI or SNRI for will vary depending on your response to treatment. Some people may have to take SSRIs for 6 to 12 months or more.

When you and your GP decide it's appropriate for you to stop taking SSRIs, you'll be weaned off them by slowly reducing your dosage. You should never stop taking your medicine unless your GP specifically advises you to.

Pregabalin
If you're unable to take SSRIs or SNRIs for medical reasons or you experience troublesome side effects, another medicine called pregabalin may be recommended. Dizziness and drowsiness are common side effects of pregabalin.

Read more about pregabalin.

Support groups
Charities like Mind and Anxiety Care UK are useful resources for information and advice about how to manage anxiety and phobias. They can also put you in touch with other people who've had similar experiences.

Overview - Anorexia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa (often called anorexia) is an eating disorder and serious mental health condition.

People who have anorexia try to keep their weight as low as possible. They may do this in different ways, such as not eating enough food, exercising too much, taking laxatives or making themselves sick (vomit). This can make them very ill because they start to starve.

They often have a distorted image of their bodies, thinking they're fat even when they're underweight.

Men and women of any age can get anorexia, but it's most common in young women and typically starts in the mid-teens.

Signs and symptoms of anorexia
Signs and symptoms of anorexia include:

if you're under 18, your weight and height being lower than the minimum expected for your age
if you're an adult, having an unusually low body mass index (BMI)
missing meals or eating very little
thinking about food a lot and being very careful about what you eat, such as avoiding eating any foods you see as fattening
believing you're fat when you're a healthy weight or underweight
your periods stopping (in women who have not reached menopause) or not starting (in younger women and girls)
physical problems, such as feeling lightheaded or dizzy, hair loss or dry skin
Some people with anorexia may also make themselves sick or do an extreme amount of exercise.

Some use medicines to reduce their hunger (appetite suppressants), help them poo (laxatives) or make them pee (diuretics) to try to stop themselves gaining weight from any food they do eat.

Getting help for anorexia
Getting help and support as soon as possible gives you the best chance of recovering from anorexia.

If you think you may have anorexia, even if you're not sure, see a GP as soon as you can.

They will ask you questions about your eating habits and how you're feeling. They will probably weigh you, and check your heart rate, blood pressure and temperature.

They may also want to do some blood tests and to check your overall physical health.

If they think you may have anorexia, or another eating disorder, they should refer you to an eating disorder specialist or team of specialists.

It can be very hard to admit you have a problem and to ask for help. It may make things easier if you bring a friend or loved one with you to your appointment.

You can also talk in confidence to an adviser from eating disorders charity Beat by calling its helpline on 0808 801 0677.

Getting help for someone else
If you're concerned that a family member or friend may have anorexia, let them know you're worried about them and encourage them to see a GP. You could offer to go along with them.

Read more about advice for parents on eating disorders and how to help someone with an eating disorder.

Treatment for anorexia
You can recover from anorexia, but it may take time and recovery will be different for everyone.

Your treatment plan will be tailored to you and should consider any other support you might need, such as for depression or anxiety.

If you're over 18, you should be offered a type of talking therapy to help you manage your feelings about food and eating so that you are able to eat enough to be healthy.

Talking therapies that are commonly used to treat anorexia in adults include:

cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Maudsley anorexia nervosa treatment for adults (MANTRA)
specialist supportive clinical management (SSCM)
If you're under 18, you should be offered family therapy. You may also be offered another type of talking therapy, such as CBT or adolescent-focused psychotherapy.

Find out how to get mental health support for children and young people.

Health risks of anorexia
Long-term anorexia can lead to severe health problems associated with not getting the right nutrients (malnutrition). But these will usually begin to get better once your food intake starts improving.

Possible complications include:

problems with muscles and bones – including feeling tired and weak, osteoporosis, and problems with physical development in children and young adults
fertility problems
loss of sex drive
problems with the heart and blood vessels – including poor circulation, an irregular heartbeat, low blood pressure, heart valve disease, heart failure, and swollen ankles, feet and legs (oedema)
problems with the brain and nerves – including difficulties with concentration and memory or, less often, fits (seizures)
kidney or bowel problems
having a weakened immune system or anaemia
Anorexia can also put your life at risk. It's one of the leading causes of deaths related to mental health problems. Deaths from anorexia may be due to physical complications or suicide.

Causes of anorexia
We do not know exactly what causes anorexia and other eating disorders. You may be more likely to get an eating disorder if:

you or a member of your family has a history of eating disorders, depression, or alcohol or drug addiction
you have been criticised for your eating habits, body shape or weight
you're overly concerned with being slim, particularly if you also feel pressure from society or your job – for example, ballet dancers, jockeys, models or athletes
you have anxiety, low self-esteem, an obsessive personality or are a perfectionist
you have been emotionally, physically or sexually abused

Antisocial personality disorder
Personality disorders are mental health conditions that affect how someone thinks, perceives, feels or relates to others.

Antisocial personality disorder is a particularly challenging type of personality disorder characterised by impulsive, irresponsible and often criminal behaviour.

Someone with antisocial personality disorder will typically be manipulative, deceitful and reckless, and will not care for other people's feelings.

Like other types of personality disorder, antisocial personality disorder is on a spectrum, which means it can range in severity from occasional bad behaviour to repeatedly breaking the law and committing serious crimes.

Psychopaths are considered to have a severe form of antisocial personality disorder.

The Mind website has more information about signs of antisocial personality disorder

Find out more about personality disorders

Signs of antisocial personality disorder
A person with antisocial personality disorder may:

exploit, manipulate or violate the rights of others
lack concern, regret or remorse about other people's distress
behave irresponsibly and show disregard for normal social behaviour
have difficulty sustaining long-term relationships
be unable to control their anger
lack guilt, or not learn from their mistakes
blame others for problems in their lives
repeatedly break the law
A person with antisocial personality disorder will have a history of conduct disorder during childhood, such as truancy (not going to school), delinquency (for example, committing crimes or substance misuse), and other disruptive and aggressive behaviours.

Who develops antisocial personality disorder?
Antisocial personality disorder affects more men than women.

It's not known why some people develop antisocial personality disorder, but both genetics and traumatic childhood experiences, such as child abuse or neglect, are thought to play a role.

A person with antisocial personality disorder will have often grown up in difficult family circumstances. 

One or both parents may misuse alcohol, and parental conflict and harsh, inconsistent parenting are common.

As a result of these problems, social services may become involved with the child's care.

These types of difficulties in childhood will often lead to behavioural problems during adolescence and adulthood.

Effects of antisocial personality disorder
Criminal behaviour is a key feature of antisocial personality disorder, and there's a high risk that someone with the disorder will commit crimes and be imprisoned at some point in their life.

Men with antisocial personality disorder have been found to be 3 to 5 times more likely than women to misuse alcohol and drugs than those without the disorder. They also have an increased risk of dying prematurely as a result of reckless behaviour or attempting suicide.

People with antisocial personality disorder are also more likely to have relationship problems during adulthood and be unemployed and homeless.

Diagnosing antisocial personality disorder
To be diagnosed with antisocial personality disorder, a person will usually have a history of conduct personality disorder before the age of 15.

Antisocial personality disorder is diagnosed after rigorous detailed psychological assessment.

A diagnosis can only be made if the person is aged 18 years or older and at least 3 of the following criteria behaviours apply:

repeatedly breaking the law
repeatedly being deceitful
being impulsive or incapable of planning ahead
being irritable and aggressive
having a reckless disregard for their safety or the safety of others
being consistently irresponsible
lack of remorse
These signs are not part of a schizophrenic or manic episode – they're part of a person's everyday personality and behaviour.

This behaviour usually becomes most extreme and challenging during the late teens and early 20s. It may improve by the time the person reaches their 40s.

Treating antisocial personality disorder
In the past, antisocial personality disorder was thought to be a lifelong disorder, but that's not always the case and it can sometimes be managed and treated.

Evidence suggests behaviour can improve over time with therapy, even if core characteristics such as lack of empathy remain. 

But antisocial personality disorder is one of the most difficult types of personality disorders to treat.

A person with antisocial personality disorder may also be reluctant to seek treatment and may only start therapy when ordered to do so by a court.

The recommended treatment for someone with antisocial personality disorder will depend on their circumstances, taking into account factors such as age, offending history and whether there are any associated problems, such as alcohol or drug misuse.

The person's family and friends will often play an active role in making decisions about their treatment and care.

Sometimes, substance misuse services and social care may also need to be involved.

National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE): management and prevention of antisocial personality disorder

Talking therapies
Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) is sometimes used to treat antisocial personality disorder.

It's a talking therapy that aims to help a person manage their problems by changing the way they think and behave.

Mentalisation-based therapy (MBT) is another type of talking therapy that's becoming more popular in the treatment of antisocial personality disorder.

The therapist will encourage the person to consider the way they think and how their mental state affects their behaviour.

Democratic therapeutic communities (DTC)
Evidence suggests community-based programmes can be an effective long-term treatment method for people with antisocial personality disorder, and is becoming increasingly popular in prisons.

DTC is a type of social therapy that aims to address the person's risk of offending, as well as their emotional and psychological needs.

It's based around large and small therapy groups and focuses on community issues, creating an environment where both staff and prisoners contribute to the decisions of the community.

There may also be opportunities for educational and vocational work.

The recommended length of treatment is 18 months, as there needs to be enough time for a person to make changes and put new skills into practice.

Self-motivation is another important factor for acceptance on to this type of scheme. For example, the person must be willing to work as part of a community, participate in groups, and be subject to the democratic process.

Read more about DTC and working with offenders with personality disorder on GOV.UK

Medicine
There's little evidence to support the use of medicine for treating antisocial personality disorder, but certain antipsychotic and antidepressant medicines may be helpful in some instances.

Carbamazepine and lithium may help control symptoms such as aggression and impulsive behaviour, and a class of antidepressant called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) may improve anger and general personality disorder symptoms.

Overview - Binge eating disorder
Binge eating disorder involves regularly eating a lot of food over a short period of time until you're uncomfortably full.

It's a serious mental health condition where people eat without feeling like they’re in control of what they’re doing.

Binges are sometimes planned in advance, but can be spontaneous. They are usually done alone, and may include "special" binge foods. You may feel guilty or ashamed after binge eating.

Men and women of any age can get binge eating disorder, but it often starts when people are in their 20s or older.

Symptoms of binge eating disorder
The main symptom of binge eating disorder is eating a lot of food in a short time and not being able to stop when full. Other symptoms include:

eating when not hungry
eating very fast during a binge
eating alone or secretly
feeling depressed, guilty, ashamed or disgusted after binge eating
People who regularly eat in this way may have binge eating disorder.

Warning signs of binge eating disorder in someone else
Someone you care about may have an eating disorder if they:

change their behaviour or have changes in their mood
eat a lot of food, very quickly
try to hide how much they're eating
store up supplies of food
put on weight (but this does not happen to everyone with binge eating disorder)
Getting help for binge eating disorder
If you think you may have binge eating disorder, see a GP as soon as you can.

They'll ask you about your eating habits and how you're feeling, and check your weight and overall health.

The GP should refer you to an eating disorder specialist or team of specialists if they think you have binge eating disorder or another eating disorder.

It can be hard to admit you need help with an eating disorder, so bringing a friend or loved one with you to your appointment may help.

You can also talk in confidence to an adviser from eating disorders charity Beat by calling its adult helpline on 0808 801 0677 or youth helpline on 0808 801 0711.

Getting help for someone else
If you're concerned that a family member or friend may have binge eating disorder, let them know you're worried about them and encourage them to see a GP. You could offer to go along with them.

Read more about talking to your child about eating disorders and supporting someone with an eating disorder.

Treatment for binge eating
Most people recover from binge eating disorder with the right support and treatment, but it may take time.

The main treatments are:

guided self-help programmes
a type of talking therapy called cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which is in group sessions or individual (1-on-1) sessions
Read more about treating binge eating disorder

Causes of binge eating
The exact causes of binge eating disorder are not known, but you are more likely to have an eating disorder if:

you or a member of your family has a history of eating disorders, depression, or alcohol or drug misuse
you're too worried about being slim, particularly if you also feel pressure from society or your job, for example, ballet dancers, models or athletes
you have anxiety, low self-esteem, an obsessive personality or are a perfectionist
you've experienced a stressful event or trauma

Bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder is a mental health condition where you have extreme mood changes. Medicines and talking therapy can help manage it.

Symptoms of bipolar disorder
The main symptom of bipolar disorder is extreme changes to your mood.

You sometimes have either:

high moods (mania or hypomania) – for example, feeling very happy, excited or energetic
low moods (depression) – for example, feeling sad, tired or hopeless
These moods usually last a few days or weeks at a time.

If you have bipolar disorder, you will usually have times where your mood is stable and you do not have any symptoms. This can last for weeks, months or years.

High mood (mania and hypomania) symptoms
Low mood (depression) symptoms
Non-urgent advice:See a GP if:
you have extreme changes in your moods that last a long time or impact your everyday life
you've been diagnosed with bipolar disorder and treatments are not helping (or speak to your mental health specialist if you have one)
If you're worried about someone else, encourage them to speak to their GP.

How bipolar disorder is diagnosed
If a GP thinks you may have bipolar disorder or another mental health condition, they will refer you to a mental health specialist (psychiatrist).

The mental health specialist will ask you about things like your moods, behaviour, health and family history.

Bipolar disorder can take time to diagnose because it affects everyone differently and the symptoms are similar to other mental health conditions.

Treatment for bipolar disorder
Bipolar disorder cannot be cured, but there are treatments that can help manage it.

A mental health specialist will work with you to create a treatment plan.

Treatments you may have include:

medicines to help stabilise your moods
talking therapy such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
Some medicines you need to take all the time, others you only take when your symptoms get worse.

The medicines can cause side effects. These will vary depending on which medicine you take and how your body responds to it.

You'll usually have appointments at a GP surgery, clinic or hospital.

If doctors are worried you're at risk of self-harm, suicide or harming someone else, you may need to stay in hospital or have support from a crisis team at home.

Important
Do not stop taking your bipolar disorder medicine unless you are told to by a doctor, even if you feel better.

Some medicines for bipolar disorder are not safe to take if you are pregnant. Talk to your doctor if you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy.

Information:
Find out more
Treatment for bipolar disorder (Mind)
NHS medicines A to Z: find your medicine
Things you can do to help with bipolar disorder
If you have bipolar disorder, it's important to know what can trigger your high and low moods. This can include things like feeling stressed, not getting enough sleep or being too busy.

There are some things you can do that can help to keep your moods stable.

Do
try to have a regular routine

get plenty of sleep

eat a healthy diet

exercise regularly

try to avoid and manage stress

Don’t
do not take recreational drugs

do not smoke

do not drink too much alcohol

do not do shift work or work very long hours if you can avoid it

do not fly at night or across time zones if you can avoid it

do not drink lots of caffeinated drinks such as coffee, tea or cola


Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
Body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), or body dysmorphia, is a mental health condition where a person spends a lot of time worrying about flaws in their appearance. These flaws are often unnoticeable to others.

People of any age can have BDD, but it's most common in teenagers and young adults. It affects both men and women.

Having BDD does not mean you're vain or self-obsessed. It can be very upsetting and have a big impact on your life.

Symptoms of body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
You might have body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) if you:

worry a lot about a specific area of your body (particularly your face)
spend a lot of time comparing your looks with other people's
look at yourself in mirrors a lot or avoid mirrors altogether
go to a lot of effort to conceal flaws – for example, by spending a long time combing your hair, applying make-up or choosing clothes
pick at your skin to make it "smooth"
BDD can seriously affect your daily life, including your work, social life and relationships.

BDD can also lead to depression, self-harm and even thoughts of suicide.

Getting help for body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
You should see a GP if you think you might have BDD.

They'll probably ask a number of questions about your symptoms and how they affect your life.

They may also ask if you've had any thoughts about harming yourself.

You may be treated by the GP, or they may refer you to a mental health specialist for further assessment and treatment. If you are under 18 you may be referred to your local children and young people's mental health services.

It can be very difficult to seek help for BDD, but it's important to remember that you have nothing to feel ashamed or embarrassed about.

Getting help is important because your symptoms probably will not go away without treatment and may get worse.

You can also refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without a referral from a GP.

Find an NHS talking therapies service
Treatments for body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
The symptoms of body dysmorphic disorder (BDD) can get better with treatment.

If your symptoms are relatively mild, you should be referred for a type of talking therapy called cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which you have either on your own or in a group.

If you have moderate symptoms, you should be offered either CBT or a type of antidepressant medicine called a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).

If your symptoms are more severe, or other treatments do not work, you should be offered CBT together with an SSRI.

Cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT)
CBT can help you manage your BDD symptoms by changing the way you think and behave.

It helps you learn what triggers your symptoms, and teaches you different ways of thinking about and dealing with your habits.

You and your therapist will agree on goals for the therapy and work together to try to reach them.

CBT for treating BDD will usually include a technique known as exposure and response prevention (ERP).

This involves gradually facing situations that would normally make you think obsessively about your appearance and feel anxious.

Your therapist will help you to find other ways of dealing with your feelings in these situations so that, over time, you become able to deal with them without feeling self-conscious or afraid.

You may also be given some self-help information to read at home and your CBT might involve group work, depending on your symptoms.

CBT for children and young people will usually also involve their family members or carers.

Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs)
SSRIs are a type of antidepressant.

There are a number of different SSRIs, but fluoxetine is most commonly used to treat BDD.

It may take up to 12 weeks for SSRIs to have an effect on your BDD symptoms.

If they work for you, you'll probably be asked to keep taking them for several months to improve your symptoms further and stop them coming back.

There are some common side effects of taking SSRIs, but these will often pass within a few weeks.

Your doctor will keep a close eye on you over the first few weeks. It's important to tell them if you're feeling particularly anxious or emotional, or are having thoughts of harming yourself.

If you've not had symptoms for 6 to 12 months, you'll probably be taken off SSRIs.

This will be done by slowly reducing your dose over time to help make sure your symptoms do not come back (relapse) and to avoid any side effects of coming off the drug (withdrawal symptoms), such as anxiety.

Children, adults younger than 30, and all people with a history of suicidal behaviour will need to be carefully monitored when taking SSRIs. This is because they may have a higher chance of developing suicidal thoughts or trying to hurt themselves in the early stages of treatment.

Children and young people may be offered an SSRI if they're having severe symptoms of BDD.

Medicine should only be suggested after they have seen a psychiatrist and been offered talking therapies.

Further treatment
If treatment with both CBT and an SSRI has not improved your BDD symptoms after 12 weeks, you may be prescribed a different type of SSRI or another antidepressant called clomipramine.

If you do not see any improvements in your symptoms, you may be referred to a mental health clinic or hospital that specialises in BDD, such as the National OCD/BDD Service in London.

These services will probably do a more in-depth assessment of your BDD.

They may offer you more CBT or a different kind of therapy, as well as a different kind of antidepressant.

Causes of body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
It's not known exactly what causes body dysmorphic disorder (BDD), but it might be associated with:

genetics – you may be more likely to develop BDD if you have a relative with BDD, obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) or depression
a chemical imbalance in the brain
a traumatic experience in the past – you may be more likely to develop BDD if you were teased, bullied or abused when you were a child
Some people with BDD also have another mental health condition, such as obsessive compulsive behaviour (OCD), generalised anxiety disorder or an eating disorder.

Things you can do to help with body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
Support groups for body dysmorphic disorder (BDD)
Some people may find it helpful to contact or join a support group for information, advice and practical tips on coping with body dysmorphic disorder (BDD).

You can ask your doctor if there are any groups in your area, and the BDD Foundation has a directory of local and online BDD support groups.

You may also find the following organisations to be useful sources of information and advice:

Anxiety UK
International OCD Foundation
Mind
OCD Action
OCD UK
Mental wellbeing
Things that can help with your mental wellbeing if you have BDD include:

taking regular exercise
making sure you get enough sleep
Some people also find it helpful to get together with friends or family, or to try doing something new to improve their mental wellbeing.

It may also be helpful to try some relaxation and breathing exercises to relieve stress and anxiety.


Overview - Borderline personality disorder
Borderline personality disorder (BPD) is a disorder of mood and how a person interacts with others. It's the most commonly recognised personality disorder.

In general, someone with a personality disorder will differ significantly from an average person in terms of how he or she thinks, perceives, feels or relates to others.

Symptoms of borderline personality disorder (BPD)
The symptoms of BPD can be grouped into 4 main areas:

emotional instability – the psychological term for this is affective dysregulation
disturbed patterns of thinking or perception – cognitive distortions or perceptual distortions
impulsive behaviour
intense but unstable relationships with others
The symptoms of a personality disorder may range from mild to severe and usually emerge in adolescence, persisting into adulthood.

Causes of borderline personality disorder (BPD)
The causes of BPD are unclear. BPD appears to result from a combination of genetic and environmental factors.

People with BPD come from many different backgrounds, but most will have experienced some kind of trauma or neglect as children.

When to get medical advice
If you're experiencing symptoms of BPD, make an appointment with a GP.

They may ask about:

how you feel
your recent behaviour
what sort of impact your symptoms have had on your quality of life
This is to rule out other more common mental health conditions, such as depression, and to make sure there's no immediate risk to your health and wellbeing.

You may also find Mind a useful website.

Find out more about how BPD is diagnosed

Treating borderline personality disorder (BPD)
Many people with BPD can benefit from psychological or medical treatment.

Treatment may involve a range of individual and group psychological therapies (psychotherapy) carried out by trained professionals working with a community mental health team (CMHT).

Effective treatment may last more than a year.

Over time, many people with BPD overcome their symptoms and recover. Additional treatment is recommended for people whose symptoms return.

Associated mental health problems
Many people with BPD also have another mental health condition or behavioural problem, such as:

misusing alcohol
generalised anxiety disorder
bipolar disorder
depression
misusing drugs
an eating disorder, such as anorexia or bulimia
another personality disorder, such as antisocial personality disorder
BPD can be a serious condition, and many people with the condition self-harm and attempt suicide.

Bulimia
Bulimia (bulimia nervosa) is an eating disorder and serious mental health condition. It can affect anyone and treatment may take time, but you can recover from it.

Important:Get urgent help
Support is available if you or someone you know is having a mental health crisis or emergency, no matter what you're going through.

Find out where to get urgent help for mental health

Symptoms of bulimia
The main signs of bulimia are:

losing control of how much you're eating over a very short time (binge eating)
ridding your body of the extra food (purging)
Purging may include making yourself sick (vomiting), taking laxative or diuretic medicines, avoiding eating for long periods of time, exercising excessively, or a combination of these.

Other signs of bulimia include:

fear of putting on weight
obsessing and being very critical about your weight and body shape
mood changes – feeling very tense, irritable, anxious or depressed
thinking about food a lot, and planning binge-eating
feeling guilty and ashamed, and behaving secretively about eating habits
avoiding social activities that involve food
feeling like you have no control over your eating
You may also notice physical signs like:

feeling tired (fatigue) and trouble sleeping
feeling weak or dizzy
a sore throat from being sick
bloating or tummy pain
puffy sides of your face and under your ears from swollen glands
irregular or stopped periods
Non-urgent advice:See a GP if:
you think you might have bulimia
you've been diagnosed with bulimia and treatments are not helping (or speak to your eating disorder specialist if you have one)
It's important to get help even if you only have some of the signs. Getting help will give you the best chance of recovery.

Information:
If you're worried about someone else
Signs of bulimia in someone else can include:

eating lots of food over a short period of time
hiding food or eating in secret
going to the bathroom a lot after eating
excessively or obsessively exercising
If you're worried about someone else, encourage them to speak to their GP.

How bulimia is diagnosed
If you see a GP about symptoms of bulimia, they'll ask you about your eating habits, how you're feeling and your physical symptoms.

It can be very hard to talk about what you're going through, but getting help gives you the best chance of recovery.

Your GP may ask to weigh you. You can tell your GP if you do not want to know how much you weigh.

If they think you have bulimia or another eating disorder, they will refer you to an eating disorder specialist or team of specialists.

It may make things easier if you bring someone you trust with you to your appointment.

Treatment for bulimia
Treatment for bulimia takes time, but you can recover. Depending on how long you've had bulimia and how severe it is, treatment can last several months or years.

Your treatment will be tailored to you and include any other support you might need, such as for depression or anxiety. You may be referred to an eating disorder specialist.

The main treatments are:

talking therapies – this usually includes a self-help booklet or online programme which you may do by yourself or with a therapist (your family may also be involved if you're under 18)
medicines, such as antidepressants, if you have another condition closely linked to bulimia, such as anxiety or depression
support from a nutrition specialist (dietitian)
You'll usually have appointments at a clinic.

But you may need to stay in hospital if you have serious health problems (such as being very underweight) or doctors are worried you're at risk of self-harm or suicide.

Important
If you're pregnant, tell your midwife and GP if you have an eating disorder or had one in the past. This will help them offer you the right support during and after pregnancy.

Information:
Find out more
Treatment for bulimia (Beat)
Health risks of bulimia
Bulimia can eventually lead to physical problems associated with not getting the right nutrients, making yourself sick a lot, or overusing laxative medicines.

Sometimes, without the right support, bulimia can be life-threatening.

Possible complications include:

problems with your teeth – stomach acid can damage tooth enamel if you're being sick a lot
damage to the lining of your throat – also caused by stomach acid
irregular or absent periods
seizures (fits)
heart or kidney problems
bowel problems, including constipation
bone problems – you may be more likely to develop weakened bones (osteopenia)
Things you can do to help with bulimia
There are some things you can do that can help while you're recovering from bulimia.

Do
try not to spend too much time looking in mirrors or checking your body

avoid weighing yourself

avoid websites or social media that encourage you to lose weight and stay at a very low body weight

try to distract yourself after meals if you're worried about purging – it can help to try a new hobby or interest that takes a lot of concentration

rinse your mouth with water or a non-acidic mouthwash after vomiting to protect your teeth and make sure you see your dentist regularly

talk to people you trust about how you're feeling or find a support group (if you're finding it hard to talk to people, try writing your feelings down instead)

Don’t
do not drink or eat acidic foods, such as fruit juice, during a binge and after purging

do not smoke, as this increases your risk of gum disease and tooth decay.

Claustrophobia
Claustrophobia is the irrational fear of confined spaces.

People affected by claustrophobia will often go out of their way to avoid confined spaces, such as lifts, tunnels, tube trains and public toilets. But avoiding these places may reinforce the fear.

Some people with claustrophobia experience mild anxiety when in a confined space, while others have severe anxiety or a panic attack.

It's estimated around 10% of the UK population are affected by claustrophobia during their lifetime.

Triggers of claustrophobia
Many different situations or feelings can trigger claustrophobia. Even thinking about certain situations without exposure to them could be a trigger.

Common triggers of claustrophobia include:

lifts
tunnels
tube trains
public toilets
rooms where the doors have to be locked
cars
hotel rooms with sealed windows
planes
If you have felt anxious in the last 6 months about being in a confined space or crowded place, or you have avoided these situations for this reason, it's likely that you're affected by claustrophobia.

MRI scan anxiety
If you have claustrophobia and need to have an MRI scan, let the staff at the hospital know before the day of your appointment.

You can talk to your consultant about having a sedative to help you relax. You should do this well in advance of having the scan.

In some cases, you may be able to attend an open or upright MRI centre, designed for people with severe MRI anxiety. But these clinics are often only available privately.

Symptoms of claustrophobia
People with claustrophobia can have panic attacks. They can be very frightening and distressing.

As well as overwhelming feelings of anxiety, claustrophobia can also cause physical symptoms, such as:

sweating
trembling
hot flushes or chills
shortness of breath or difficulty breathing
a choking sensation
a rapid heartbeat (tachycardia)
chest pain or a feeling of tightness in the chest
a sensation of butterflies in the stomach
feeling sick
headaches and dizziness
feeling faint
numbness or pins and needles
a dry mouth
a need to go to the toilet
ringing in your ears
feeling confused or disorientated
If you have severe claustrophobia, you may also experience psychological symptoms, such as:

fear of losing control
fear of fainting
feelings of being detached from your body
fear of dying
What causes claustrophobia?
Claustrophobia is often caused by a traumatic event experienced during early childhood.

For example, adults may develop claustrophobia if, as a child, they:

were trapped or kept in a confined space
were bullied or abused
had a parent with claustrophobia
Claustrophobia can also be triggered by unpleasant experiences or situations, such as turbulence when flying or being stuck in a tube tunnel between stations.

A child growing up with a parent who has claustrophobia may develop claustrophobia themselves by associating confined spaces with their parent's anxiety and feeling helpless to comfort the person they loved.

Treating claustrophobia
Many people live with claustrophobia without having it formally diagnosed and take great care to avoid confined spaces.

But getting help from a GP or a specialist with expertise in behavioural therapy, such as a psychologist, can often be beneficial.

Treatments are available for claustrophobia and can include:

talking treatments, including cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) and exposure therapy
self-help - find out more about phobias and self-care on the Mind website
medicines, such as antidepressants or tranquilisers
CBT is a talking therapy that explores your thoughts, feelings and behaviour, and develops practical ways of effectively dealing with your phobia.

You can get free talking therapies, including CBT, on the NHS.

You do not need a referral from your GP.

You can refer yourself directly to a talking therapies service.

Find an NHS talking therapies service in your area

If you prefer, talk to a GP and they can refer you.

Exposure therapy is a type of CBT that gradually exposes you to the situation that causes your fear. It's sometimes also known as desensitisation therapy. You can do it by yourself or with the help of a professional.

Find out more about CBT and exposure therapy.

Coping with a panic attack
If possible, stay where you are during a panic attack. It could last up to an hour, so if you're driving, you may need to pull over and park where it's safe to do so. Do not rush to a place of safety.

During the attack, remind yourself that the frightening thoughts and sensations are a sign of panic and will eventually pass.

Focus on something non-threatening and visible, such as the time passing on your watch or items in a supermarket.

The symptoms of a panic attack usually peak within 10 minutes, with most attacks lasting between 5 and 30 minutes.

Cyclothymia
Cyclothymia, or cyclothymic disorder, causes mood changes – from feeling low to emotional highs.

Cyclothymia is a mild form of bipolar disorder.

Most people's symptoms are mild enough that they do not seek mental health treatment, or the emotional highs feel nice, so they do not realise there's anything wrong or want to seek help.

This means cyclothymia often goes undiagnosed and untreated.

But the mood swings can affect daily life, and cause problems with personal and work relationships.

If you think you have cyclothymia, it's important to seek help from a GP.

People with cyclothymia are at risk of developing full bipolar disorder, so it's important to get help before reaching this stage.

People can get cyclothymia at any age.

Symptoms of cyclothymia
If you have cyclothymia, you'll have periods of feeling low followed by periods of feeling very happy and excited (called hypomania) when you do not need much sleep, are more sociable and impulsive and feel that you have a lot of energy.

The periods of low mood do not last long enough and are not severe enough to be diagnosed as depression.

You might feel sluggish and lose interest in things during these periods, but this should not stop you going about your day-to-day life.

Mood swings will be fairly frequent – you will not go for longer than 2 months without experiencing low mood or an emotional high.

Doctors may diagnose cyclothymia if you've had symptoms for at least 2 years, or 1 year for children and teenagers.

Symptoms of cyclothymia are not severe enough for you to be diagnosed with full bipolar disorder, and your mood swings will be broken up by periods of normal mood.

Treatment for cyclothymia
Treatment usually involves some kind of talking therapy (psychotherapy). You may also need medicines.

The aim is to:

stop the cyclothymia developing into full bipolar disorder
reduce your symptoms
stop your symptoms coming back
Psychotherapy
Psychotherapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), may help with cyclothymia.

CBT involves talking to a trained therapist to find ways to help you manage your symptoms by changing the way you think and behave.

You'll be given practical ways to improve your state of mind on a daily basis.

Medicines
You may be prescribed medicines to level out your mood (mood stabilisers).

Mood stabilisers include:

lithium – commonly used to treat bipolar disorder
epilepsy medicines – such as carbamazepine, oxcarbazepine or sodium valproate
Some antipsychotics such as quetiapine are also sometimes used as mood stabilisers.

But not all people with cyclothymia need or respond to medicine.

The charity Mind has more information on lithium and other mood stabilisers.

Further support for cyclothymia
Find your nearest mental health support service

You may also find it helpful to join a support group so you can talk to others who share your experiences and problems.

You can ask your mental health service or GP if there's a local group you can join.

Read about depression support groups

Other organisations that can help include:

Bipolar UK
Mind
Rethink Mental Illness
Living with cyclothymia
It's not known how many people with cyclothymia will go on to develop full bipolar disorder.

But some people with cyclothymia see their elevated or depressed moods become more severe.

Other people will find their cyclothymia continues and they need to manage this as a lifelong condition.

Causes of cyclothymia
The causes of cyclothymia are not known, but there's probably a genetic link because cyclothymia, depression and bipolar disorder all tend to run in families.

In some people, traumatic events or experiences may act as a trigger for the condition, such as severe illness or long periods of stress.

Overview - Depression in adults
Depression is more than simply feeling unhappy or fed up for a few days.

Most people go through periods of feeling down, but when you're depressed you feel persistently sad for weeks or months, rather than just a few days.

Some people think depression is trivial and not a genuine health condition. They're wrong – it is a real illness with real symptoms. Depression is not a sign of weakness or something you can "snap out of" by "pulling yourself together".

The good news is that with the right treatment and support, most people with depression can make a full recovery.

These pages are about depression in adults. Read about depression in children and young people.

How to tell if you have depression
Depression affects people in different ways and can cause a wide variety of symptoms.

They range from lasting feelings of unhappiness and hopelessness, to losing interest in the things you used to enjoy and feeling very tearful. Many people with depression also have symptoms of anxiety.

There can be physical symptoms too, such as feeling constantly tired, sleeping badly, having no appetite or sex drive, and various aches and pains.

The symptoms of depression range from mild to severe. At its mildest, you may simply feel persistently low in spirit, while severe depression can make you feel suicidal, that life is no longer worth living.

Most people experience feelings of stress, anxiety or low mood during difficult times. A low mood may improve after a short period of time, rather than being a sign of depression.

When to see a doctor
It's important to seek help from a GP if you think you may be depressed.

Many people wait a long time before seeking help for depression, but it's best not to delay. The sooner you see a doctor, the sooner you can be on the way to recovery.

What causes depression?
Sometimes there's a trigger for depression. Life-changing events, such as bereavement, losing your job or giving birth, can bring it on.

People with a family history of depression are more likely to experience it themselves. But you can also become depressed for no obvious reason.

Read more about the causes of depression

Treating depression
Treatment for depression can involve a combination of lifestyle changes, talking therapies and medicine. Your recommended treatment will be based on how severe your depression is.

If you have mild depression, your doctor may suggest waiting to see whether it improves on its own, while monitoring your progress. This is known as "watchful waiting". They may also suggest lifestyle measures such as exercise and guided self-help.

Talking therapies, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), may also be used for mild depression.

For moderate to severe depression, a combination of talking therapy and antidepressants is often recommended. If you have severe depression, you may be referred to a specialist mental health team for intensive specialist talking treatments and prescribed medicine.

Living with depression
Many people with depression benefit by making lifestyle changes, such as getting more exercise, cutting down on alcohol, giving up smoking and eating healthily.

Reading a self-help book or joining a support group are also worthwhile. They can help you gain a better understanding about what causes you to feel depressed. Sharing your experiences with others in a similar situation can also be very supportive.

Dissociative disorders
Dissociative disorders are a range of conditions that can cause physical and psychological problems.

Some dissociative disorders are very short-lived, perhaps following a traumatic life event, and resolve on their own over a matter of weeks or months. Others can last much longer.

Symptoms of a dissociative disorder
Symptoms of dissociative disorder can vary but may include:

feeling disconnected from yourself and the world around you
forgetting about certain time periods, events and personal information
feeling uncertain about who you are
having multiple distinct identities
feeling little or no physical pain
Some people with dissociative disorders have seizures. These can vary from fainting to something more like an epileptic seizure.

Dissociation is a way the mind copes with too much stress.

Periods of dissociation can last for a relatively short time (hours or days) or for much longer (weeks or months).

Many people with a dissociative disorder have had a traumatic event during childhood. Dissociation can happen as a way of coping with it.

Types of dissociative disorder
There are several different types of dissociative disorder.

The 3 main types are:

depersonalisation-derealisation disorder
dissociative amnesia
dissociative identity disorder
Depersonalisation-derealisation disorder
Depersonalisation is where you have the feeling of being outside yourself and observing your actions, feelings or thoughts from a distance.

Derealisation is where you feel the world is unreal. People and things around you may seem "lifeless" or "foggy".

You can have depersonalisation or derealisation, or both together. It may last only a few moments or come and go over many years.

Dissociative amnesia
Someone with dissociative amnesia will have periods where they cannot remember information about themselves or events in their past life.

They may also forget a learned talent or skill.

These gaps in memory are much more severe than normal forgetfulness and are not the result of another medical condition.

Some people with dissociative amnesia find themselves in a strange place without knowing how they got there.

They may have travelled there on purpose, or wandered in a confused state.

These blank episodes may last minutes, hours or days. In rare cases, they can last months or years.

Dissociative identity disorder
Dissociative identity disorder (DID) used to be called multiple personality disorder.

Someone diagnosed with DID may feel uncertain about their identity and who they are.

They may feel the presence of other identities, each with their own names, voices, personal histories and mannerisms.

The main symptoms of DID are:

memory gaps about everyday events and personal information
having several distinct identities
Associated conditions
Someone with a dissociative disorder may also have other mental health conditions, such as:

medically unexplained symptoms
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
depression
mood swings
anxiety and panic attacks
suicidal tendencies or self-harm
an eating disorder
obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
They may also have problems sleeping (insomnia).

Causes of dissociative disorder
There are many possible causes of dissociative disorders, including previous traumatic experience.

Someone with a dissociative disorder may have experienced physical, sexual or emotional abuse during childhood.

Some people dissociate after experiencing war, kidnapping or even an invasive medical procedure.

Switching off from reality is a normal defence mechanism that helps the person cope during a traumatic time.

It's a form of denial, as if "this is not happening to me".

It becomes a problem when the environment is no longer traumatic but the person still acts and lives as if it is, and has not dealt with or processed the event.

Diagnosing dissociative disorders
A GP may examine you and do some tests to check if another illness might be the cause of your symptoms.

They may also refer you to a mental health specialist for a full assessment.

Assessment
The specialist who carries out your assessment should have a good understanding of dissociative disorders.

The assessment may include questions about your thoughts, feelings, behaviour and your symptoms.

It's important to be honest about your symptoms and not to feel ashamed or embarrassed, so you can receive the help and support you need.

Treatments for dissociative disorders
Many people with a dissociative disorder make a full recovery with treatment and support.

Talking therapies
Talking therapies are often recommended for dissociative disorders.

The aim of talking therapies such as counselling or psychotherapy is to help you cope with the underlying cause of your symptoms, and to learn and practise techniques to manage the periods of feeling disconnected.

Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR)
Eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR) is a psychological treatment that can help reduce the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). It is sometimes used to treat dissociative disorders.

Medicines
There's no specific medicine to treat dissociation, but medicines like antidepressants may be prescribed to treat associated conditions like depression, anxiety and panic attacks.

If you're feeling suicidal
If you have thoughts about taking your life, it's important you ask someone for help.

It's probably difficult for you to see it at this time, but you're not alone or beyond help.  

There are people you can talk to who want to help:

speak to a friend, family member or someone you trust, as they may be able to help you calm down and find some breathing space
call the Samaritans free 24-hour support service on 116 123
go to your nearest A&E and tell the staff how you're feeling
contact NHS 111
make an urgent appointment to see a GP
Find out more about getting help if you're feeling suicidal

What to do if you're worried about someone
If you're worried that someone you know may be considering suicide, try to encourage them to talk about how they're feeling.

Listening is the best way to help. Try to avoid offering solutions and try not to judge. 

If they have previously been diagnosed with a mental health condition, such as depression, you can speak to a member of their care team. They will offer help and advice but cannot share information about the person without consent.

Overview – Eating disorders
An eating disorder is a mental health condition where you use the control of food to cope with feelings and other situations.

Unhealthy eating behaviours may include eating too much or too little or worrying about your weight or body shape.

Anyone can get an eating disorder, but teenagers and young adults are mostly affected.

With treatment, most people can recover from an eating disorder.

Types of eating disorders
The most common eating disorders are:

anorexia nervosa (often called anorexia) – trying to control your weight by not eating enough food, exercising too much, or doing both
bulimia – losing control over how much you eat and then taking drastic action to not put on weight
binge eating disorder (BED) – eating large portions of food until you feel uncomfortably full
Other specified feeding or eating disorder (OSFED)
A person may have an OSFED if their symptoms do not exactly fit the expected symptoms for any specific eating disorders.

OSFED is the most common eating disorder.

Find out more about OSFED on the Beat website

Avoidant/restrictive food intake disorder (ARFID)
ARFID is when someone avoids certain foods, limits how much they eat or does both.

Beliefs about weight or body shape are not reasons why people develop ARFID.

Possible reasons for ARFID include:

negative feelings over the smell, taste or texture of certain foods
a response to a past experience with food that was upsetting, for example, choking or being sick after eating something
not feeling hungry or just a lack of interest in eating
Find out more about ARFID on the Beat website

Check if you have an eating disorder
If you or people around you are worried that you have an unhealthy relationship with food, you could have an eating disorder.

Symptoms of eating disorders include:

spending a lot of time worrying about your weight and body shape
avoiding socialising when you think food will be involved
eating very little food
making yourself sick or taking laxatives after you eat
exercising too much
having very strict habits or routines around food
changes in your mood, such as being withdrawn, anxious or depressed
You may also notice physical signs, including:

feeling cold, tired or dizzy
pains, tingling or numbness in your arms and legs (poor circulation)
feeling your heart racing, fainting or feeling faint
problems with your digestion, such as bloating, constipation or diarrhoea
your weight being very high or very low for someone of your age and height
not getting your period or other delayed signs of puberty
You can read more about:

anorexia symptoms
bulimia symptoms
binge eating disorder and its symptoms
Warning signs of an eating disorder in someone else
It can be very difficult to identify that a loved one or friend has an eating disorder.

Warning signs to look out for include:

dramatic weight loss
lying about how much they've eaten, when they've eaten, or their weight
eating a lot of food very fast
going to the bathroom a lot after eating
exercising a lot
avoiding eating with others
cutting food into small pieces or eating very slowly
wearing loose or baggy clothes to hide their weight loss
Getting help for an eating disorder
If you think you may have an eating disorder, see a GP as soon as you can.

A GP will ask about your eating habits and how you're feeling, plus check your overall health and weight.

They may refer you to an eating disorder specialist or team of specialists.

It can be very hard to admit you have a problem and ask for help. It may make things easier if you bring a friend or loved one with you to your appointment.

You can also talk in confidence to an adviser from eating disorders charity Beat by calling the Beat helpline on 0808 801 0677.

Further information:
Beat: get information and support
Getting help for someone else
It can be difficult to know what to do if you're worried that someone has an eating disorder.

They may not realise they have an eating disorder. They may also deny it, or be secretive and defensive about their eating or weight.

Let them know you're worried about them and encourage them to see a GP. You could offer to go along with them.

Read more about talking to your child about eating disorders and supporting someone with an eating disorder.

The eating disorder charity Beat also has information and advice:

Beat: what to do if you're worried about a friend or family member
Beat: what to do if you're worried about a colleague
Treatment for eating disorders
You can recover from an eating disorder, but it may take time and recovery will be different for everyone.

If you're referred to an eating disorder specialist or team of specialists, they'll be responsible for your care.

They should talk to you about the support you might need, such as for other conditions you have, and include this in your treatment plan.

Your treatment will depend on the type of eating disorder you have, but usually includes a talking therapy.

You may also need regular health checks if your eating disorder is having an impact on your physical health.

Your treatment may also involve working through a guided self-help programme if you have bulimia or binge eating disorder.

Most people will be offered individual therapy, but those with binge eating disorder may be offered group therapy.

Read more about the different treatments for:

anorexia
bulimia
binge eating disorder
Treatment for other specified feeding or eating disorder (OSFED) will depend on the type of eating disorder your symptoms are most like.

For example, if your symptoms are most like anorexia, your treatment will be similar to the treatment for anorexia.

What causes eating disorders?
The exact cause of eating disorders is unknown.

You may be more likely to get an eating disorder if:

you or a member of your family has a history of eating disorders, depression, or alcohol or drug misuse
you've been criticised for your eating habits, body shape or weight
you're really worried about being slim, particularly if you also feel pressure from society or your job, for example, ballet dancers, models or athletes
you have anxiety, low self-esteem, an obsessive personality or are a perfectionist
you've been sexually abused

Overview - Fabricated or induced illness
Fabricated or induced illness (FII) is a rare form of child abuse. It happens when a parent or carer exaggerates or deliberately causes symptoms of illness in the child.

The parent or carer tries to convince doctors that the child is ill, or that their condition is worse than it really is.

The parent or carer does not necessarily intend to deceive doctors, but their behaviour is likely to harm the child. For example the child may have unnecessary treatment or tests, be made to believe they're ill, or have their education disrupted.

FII used to be known as "Munchausen's syndrome by proxy" (not to be confused with Munchausen's syndrome, where a person pretends to be ill or causes illness or injury to themselves).

Signs of fabricated or induced illness
Fabricated or induced illness (FII) covers a wide range of symptoms and behaviours involving parents or carers seeking healthcare for a child. This ranges from exaggerating or inventing symptoms, to deliberately making the child ill.

Behaviours in FII can include a parent or carer who:

persuades healthcare professionals that their child is ill when they're healthy
exaggerates or lies about their child's symptoms
manipulates test results to suggest the child is ill, for example, by putting glucose in urine samples to suggest the child has diabetes
deliberately induces symptoms of illness, for example, by poisoning their child with unnecessary medicine or other substances
Cases where the parent or carer wrongly reports symptoms are much more common than cases where they induce illness in the child.

Learn more about the signs of fabricated or induced illness.

Why fabricated or induced illness happens
The reasons why FII happens are not fully understood.

The parent or carer will have a need for their child to be treated as if they're ill, or as being more unwell than they really are. Their behaviour is intended to convince doctors that the child is ill.

This may be because the parent or carer gains something, such as attention, support or closeness to the child. Or it may be because they have anxiety or incorrect beliefs about their child's health, and they need these beliefs to be confirmed and acted upon.

The parent or carer is not always fully aware of the reasons for their own behaviour.

A large number of parents or carers involved in FII have borderline personality disorders characterised by emotional instability, impulsiveness and disturbed thinking.

Some parents or carers involved in FII have so-called "somatoform disorders", where they experience multiple, recurrent physical symptoms. A proportion of these parents or carers also have Munchausen's syndrome.

Some parents or carers have unresolved psychological and behavioural problems, such as a history of self-harming, or drug or alcohol misuse. Some have experienced the death of another child.

There have also been several reported cases where illness was fabricated or induced for financial reasons. For example, to claim disability benefits.

Read more about the possible causes of fabricated or induced illness.

What to do if you suspect a child is at risk
FII is a child safeguarding issue and cannot be managed by the NHS alone.

Medical professionals who suspect FII is happening should liaise with social services and the police, and must follow local child safeguarding procedures.

If your job involves working with children, for example, if you're a nursery worker or teacher, tell the person in your organisation who's responsible for child safeguarding issues. If you do not know who this is, your immediate supervisor or manager should be able to tell you.

If you suspect someone you know may be fabricating or inducing illness in their child, do not confront them directly. It's unlikely to make the person admit to wrongdoing, and it may give them the opportunity to dispose of any evidence of abuse.

You can contact your local social services department, or telephone the NSPCC's child protection helpline on 0808 800 5000, or email the NSPCC at help@NSPCC.org.uk. The helpline is open from 10am to 4pm Monday to Friday.

Read more about what to do if you suspect fabricated or induced illness.

How a case is managed
The child
The first priority is to protect the child, find out their true state of health and restore them to good health. Health professionals will create a health and education rehabilitation plan for the child.

The local authority children's social care team may also be involved. They may remove the child from the care of the person responsible. If the child is in hospital, the parent or carer may need to be removed from the ward.

The child may need help returning to a normal lifestyle, including going back to school. Younger children and babies who do not understand what was happening often make a good recovery after the abuse stops.

Older children, particularly those who've been abused for many years, may have more problems. For example, many affected children believe they're really ill. They need help and support to develop a more realistic understanding of their health.

It's common for older children to feel loyal to their parent or carer, and a sense of guilt if that person is removed from the family.

The parent or carer
Once the child is safe, it may be possible to treat the parent or carer's underlying psychological problems. This may include a combination of:

intensive psychotherapy
family therapy
The aim of psychotherapy is to uncover and resolve the issues that caused the person to fabricate or induce illness in the child.

Family therapy aims to resolve any tensions within the family, improve parenting skills and attempt to repair the relationship between the parent or carer and the child.

In more severe cases, the parent or carer may be compulsorily detained in a psychiatric ward under the Mental Health Act so their relationship with the child can be closely monitored.

Parents or carers involved in FII are difficult to treat because most do not admit their deceptions and refuse to recognise their abusive behaviour. In some cases, the child is permanently removed from their care.

The best results are achieved in cases where the parent or carer:

understands and acknowledges the harm they've caused
is able to communicate the underlying motivations and needs that led them to fabricate or cause illness
is able to work together with healthcare and other professionals.

Health anxiety
Health anxiety is when you spend so much time worrying you're ill, or going to get ill, that it starts to take over your life. It's related to obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD).

Check if you have health anxiety
You may have health anxiety if you:

constantly worry about your health
frequently check your body for signs of illness, such as lumps, tingling or pain
are always asking people for reassurance that you're not ill
worry that a doctor or medical tests may have missed something
obsessively look at health information on the internet or in the media
avoid anything to do with serious illness, such as medical TV programmes
act as if you were ill (for example, avoiding physical activities)
Anxiety itself can cause symptoms like headaches or a racing heartbeat, and you may mistake these for signs of illness.

Self-help for health anxiety
Keep a diary
Note how often you check your body, ask people for reassurance, or look at health information.
Try to gradually reduce how often you do these things over a week.
Challenge your thoughts
Draw a table with 2 columns.
Write your health worries in the 1st column, then more balanced thoughts in the 2nd. For example, in the 1st column you may write, "I'm worried about these headaches" and in the 2nd, "Headaches can often be a sign of stress".
Keep busy with other things
When you get the urge to check your body, for example, distract yourself by going for a walk or calling a friend.
Get back to normal activities
Try to gradually start doing things you've been avoiding because of your health worries, such as sports or socialising.
Try to relax
Try breathing exercises for stress or visit the Mind website for some relaxation exercises.
Non-urgent advice:See a GP if:
your worries about your health are preventing you leading a normal life
self-help is not working
Treatment for health anxiety
If a GP diagnoses you with health anxiety, they may refer you for a talking therapy, such as cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), or offer you a medicine for anxiety.

You can refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without a referral from a GP.

Find NHS talking therapies for anxiety and depression
If you can afford it, you can choose to pay for your therapy privately. The cost of private therapy sessions varies, but it can cost from £35 upwards per session.

Free therapy or low-cost sessions starting at £15 are sometimes available. Find out more from these charities:

Mind: How to find therapy or counselling
Anxiety UK: Therapy services
The British Association for Behavioural and Cognitive Psychotherapies has a register of all accredited therapists in the UK, and The British Psychological Society has a directory of chartered psychologies, some of whom specialise in CBT.

Overview - Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
Obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD) is a mental health condition where a person has obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviours.

OCD can affect men, women and children. People can start having symptoms from as early as 6 years old, but it often begins around puberty and early adulthood.

OCD can be distressing and significantly interfere with your life, but treatment can help you keep it under control.

Symptoms of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
If you have OCD, you'll usually experience frequent obsessive thoughts and compulsive behaviours.

An obsession is an unwanted and unpleasant thought, image or urge that repeatedly enters your mind, causing feelings of anxiety, disgust or unease.
A compulsion is a repetitive behaviour or mental act that you feel you need to do to temporarily relieve the unpleasant feelings brought on by the obsessive thought.
For example, someone with an obsessive fear of being burgled may feel they need to check all the windows and doors are locked several times before they can leave their house.

Women can sometimes have OCD during pregnancy or after their baby is born. Obsessions may include worrying about harming the baby or not sterilising feeding bottles properly. Compulsions could be things such as repeatedly checking the baby is breathing, and intrusive, unwanted and unpleasant thoughts, images or urges. These can cause anxiety and lead to repetitive behaviours.

If you keep getting these thoughts and they have an effect on your daily life, speak to your GP or health visitor. They can support you or refer you to a specialist mental health team if you need it.

Getting help for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
People with OCD are sometimes reluctant to seek help because they feel ashamed or embarrassed.

OCD is a health condition like any other, so there's nothing to feel ashamed or embarrassed about. Having OCD does not mean you're "mad" and it's not your fault you have it.

There are 2 main ways to get help:

refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service – find an NHS talking therapies service in your area
see a GP – they'll ask about your symptoms and can refer you to a local talking therapies service if necessary
If you think a friend or family member may have OCD, try talking to them about your concerns and suggest they get help.

If you’re under 18, or want to get help for someone under 18, find out how to get mental health support for children and young people.

It's unlikely OCD will get better without proper treatment and support.

Treatments for obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
There are some effective treatments for OCD that can help reduce the impact it has on your life.

The main treatments are:

talking therapy – usually cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT), which helps you face your fears and obsessive thoughts without "putting them right" through compulsions
medicine – usually a type of antidepressant medicine called selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), which can help by altering the balance of chemicals in your brain
CBT will usually have an effect quite quickly. It can take up to 12 weeks before you notice the effects of treatment with SSRIs, but most people will eventually benefit.

If these treatments do not help, you may be offered:

an alternative SSRI
a combination of an SSRI and CBT
an antidepressant called clomipramine
Some people may be referred to a specialist mental health service for further treatment.

Causes of obsessive compulsive disorder (OCD)
It's not clear what causes OCD. A number of different factors may play a part, including:

family history – you're more likely to develop OCD if a family member has it. It may be learned behaviour, or possibly because of your genes
differences in the brain – some people with OCD have areas of unusually high activity in their brain or low levels of a chemical called serotonin
life events – OCD may be more common in people who have been bullied, abused or neglected, and it sometimes starts after an important life event, such as childbirth or a bereavement
personality – neat, meticulous, methodical people with high personal standards may be more likely to develop OCD, also people who are generally quite anxious or have a very strong sense of responsibility for themselves and others
Support groups
Living with OCD can be difficult. In addition to getting medical help, you might find it helps to contact a support group or other people with OCD for information and advice.

Personality disorders
A person with a personality disorder thinks, feels, behaves or relates to others very differently from the average person.

There are several different types of personality disorder.

This page gives some information about personality disorders in general, linking to other sources for more detail.

Symptoms of a personality disorder
Symptoms vary depending on the type of personality disorder.

For example, a person with borderline personality disorder (one of the most common types) tends to have disturbed ways of thinking, impulsive behaviour and problems controlling their emotions.

They may have intense but unstable relationships and worry about people abandoning them.

A person with antisocial personality disorder will typically get easily frustrated and have difficulty controlling their anger.

They may blame other people for problems in their life, and be aggressive and violent, upsetting others with their behaviour.

Someone with a personality disorder may also have other mental health problems, such as depression and drug addiction.

Other types of personality disorder will have different symptoms.

Find out more about the different types of personality disorder on the Mind website

Information:
Mild, moderate and severe personality disorders
The way personality disorders are diagnosed is changing. Instead of being diagnosed with a type of personality disorder (such as borderline personality disorder), you may be diagnosed with mild, moderate or severe personality disorder. A mental health professional can talk to you about what your diagnosis means.

Treatment for a personality disorder
Treatment for a personality disorder usually involves a talking therapy and can also include other types of therapy and medicine.

Talking therapies
This is where the person talks to a therapist to get a better understanding of their own thoughts, feelings and behaviours.

Treatment can last several months or years, depending on the severity of the condition and other problems the person may have.

As well as listening and discussing important issues with the person, the therapist may identify strategies to resolve problems and, if necessary, help them change their attitudes and behaviour.

Therapeutic communities
Treatment at a therapeutic community may be offered to some people with personality disorders. Therapeutic communities (TCs) are places where someone visits or stays for an intensive form of group therapy. The experience of having a personality disorder is explored in depth.

The person usually attends for a number of weeks or months.

Medicine
Medicine may be prescribed to treat problems associated with a personality disorder, such as depression, anxiety or psychotic symptoms.

For example, moderate to severe symptoms of depression might be treated with a type of antidepressant called a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).

Read more about the treatment for borderline personality disorder and antisocial personality disorder.

Information:
Find out more about treatments for personality disorders:

Mind
Rethink Mental Illness
Recovery
Many people with a personality disorder recover over time. Psychological or medical treatment is often helpful, but support is sometimes all that's needed.

There's no single approach that suits everyone – treatment should be tailored to the individual.

Causes
It's not clear exactly what causes personality disorders, but they're thought to result from a combination of the genes a person inherits and early environmental influences – for example, a distressing childhood experience (such as abuse or neglect).

Pregnancy, becoming a parent and personality disorders
If you have a personality disorder, you may need extra support during your pregnancy and after your child is born.

You can speak to a GP, midwife or health visitor if you would like support.

Overview - Phobias
A phobia is an overwhelming and debilitating fear of an object, place, situation, feeling or animal.

Phobias are more pronounced than fears. They develop when a person has an exaggerated or unrealistic sense of danger about a situation or object.

If a phobia becomes very severe, a person may organise their life around avoiding the thing that's causing them anxiety. As well as restricting their day-to-day life, it can also cause a lot of distress.

Phobia symptoms
A phobia is a type of anxiety disorder. You may not experience any symptoms until you come into contact with the source of your phobia.

But in some cases, even thinking about the source of a phobia can make a person feel anxious or panicky. This is known as anticipatory anxiety.

Symptoms may include:

unsteadiness, dizziness and lightheadedness
nausea
sweating
increased heart rate or palpitations
shortness of breath
trembling or shaking
an upset stomach
If you do not come into contact with the source of your phobia very often, it may not affect your everyday life.

But if you have a complex phobia, such as agoraphobia, leading a normal life may be very difficult.

Types of phobia
There are a wide variety of objects or situations that someone could develop a phobia about.

But phobias can be divided into 2 main categories:

specific or simple phobias
complex phobias
Specific or simple phobias
Specific or simple phobias centre around a particular object, animal, situation or activity.

They often develop during childhood or adolescence and may become less severe as you get older.

Common examples of simple phobias include:

animal phobias – such as dogs, spiders, snakes or rodents
environmental phobias – such as heights, deep water and germs
situational phobias – such as visiting the dentist or flying
bodily phobias – such as blood, vomit or having injections
sexual phobias – such as performance anxiety or the fear of getting a sexually transmitted infection (STI)
Complex phobias
Complex phobias tend to be more disabling than simple phobias. They usually develop during adulthood and are often associated with a deep-rooted fear or anxiety about a particular situation or circumstance.

The 2 most common complex phobias are:

agoraphobia
social phobia
Agoraphobia is often thought of as a fear of open spaces, but it's much more complex than this.

Someone with agoraphobia will feel anxious about being in a place or situation where escaping may be difficult if they have a panic attack.

The anxiety usually results in the person avoiding situations such as:

being alone
being in crowded places, such as busy restaurants or supermarkets
travelling on public transport
Social phobia, also known as social anxiety disorder, centres around feeling anxious in social situations.

If you have a social phobia, you might be afraid of speaking in front of people for fear of embarrassing yourself and being humiliated in public.

In severe cases, this can become debilitating and may prevent you carrying out everyday activities, such as eating out or meeting friends.

What causes phobias?
Phobias do not seem to have a single cause, but there are a number of associated factors.

For example:

a phobia may be associated with a particular incident or trauma
a phobia may be a learned response that a person develops early in life from a parent or sibling (brother or sister)
genetics may play a role – there's evidence to suggest that some people are born with a tendency to be more anxious than others
Diagnosing phobias
Phobias are not always formally diagnosed. Most people with a phobia are fully aware of the problem.

A person will sometimes choose to live with a phobia, taking great care to avoid the object or situation they're afraid of.

But if you have a phobia, continually trying to avoid what you're afraid of could make the situation worse.

Ask a GP for help if you have a phobia. They may refer you to a specialist with expertise in behavioural therapy, such as a psychologist.

You can refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without a referral from a GP.

Find an NHS talking therapies service
Treating phobias
Most phobias can be treated successfully.

Simple phobias can be treated through gradual exposure to the object, animal, place or situation that causes fear and anxiety. This is known as desensitisation or self-exposure therapy.

You could try these methods with the help of a professional or as part of a self-help programme.

Treating complex phobias often takes longer and involves talking therapies, such as:

counselling
psychotherapy
cognitive behavioural therapy
Medication may be prescribed to help with anxiety caused by certain phobias.

Medicines that may be used include:

antidepressants
tranquillisers
beta blockers
How common are phobias?
Phobias are a common type of anxiety disorder.

They can affect anyone, regardless of age, sex and social background.

Some of the most common phobias include:

arachnophobia – fear of spiders
claustrophobia – fear of confined spaces
agoraphobia – fear of open spaces and public places
social phobia – fear of social situations

Overview - Post-traumatic stress disorder
Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is a mental health condition caused by very stressful, frightening or distressing events.

Symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Someone with PTSD often relives the traumatic event through nightmares and flashbacks, and may experience feelings of isolation, irritability and guilt.

They may also have problems sleeping, such as insomnia, and find concentrating difficult.

These symptoms are often severe and persistent enough to have a significant impact on the person's day-to-day life.

Causes of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Any situation that a person finds traumatic can cause PTSD.

These can include:

serious road accidents
violent personal assaults, such as sexual assault, mugging or robbery
serious health problems
childbirth experiences
PTSD can develop immediately after someone experiences a disturbing event, or it can occur weeks, months or even years later.

PTSD is estimated to affect about 1 in every 3 people who have a traumatic experience, but it's not clear exactly why some people develop the condition and others do not.

Complex post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
People who repeatedly experience traumatic situations, such as severe neglect, abuse or violence, may be diagnosed with complex PTSD.

Complex PTSD can cause similar symptoms to PTSD and may not develop until years after the event.

It's often more severe if the trauma was experienced early in life, as this can affect a child's development.

Find out more about complex PTSD

When to get medical advice
It's normal to experience upsetting and confusing thoughts after a traumatic event, but most people improve naturally over a few weeks.

You should see a GP if you or your child are still having problems about 4 weeks after the traumatic experience, or if the symptoms are particularly troublesome.

If necessary, your GP can refer you to mental health specialists for further assessment and treatment.

How post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is treated
PTSD can be successfully treated, even when it develops many years after a traumatic event.

Treatment depends on the severity of symptoms and how soon they occur after the traumatic event. 

Any of the following treatment options may be recommended:

watchful waiting – monitoring your symptoms to see whether they improve or get worse without treatment
antidepressants – such as paroxetine or sertraline
talking therapies – such as trauma-focused cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) or eye movement desensitisation and reprocessing (EMDR)
You can refer yourself directly to a talking therapies service.

Psychotic depression
Some people who have severe depression may also experience hallucinations and delusional thinking, the symptoms of psychosis.

Depression with psychosis is known as psychotic depression.

Symptoms of depression
Someone with depression feels sad and hopeless for most of the day, practically every day, and has no interest in anything. Getting through the day feels almost impossible.

Other typical symptoms of depression may include:

fatigue (exhaustion)
disturbed sleep
changes in appetite
feeling worthless and guilty
being unable to concentrate or being indecisive
thoughts of death or suicide
Doctors describe depression as mild, moderate or severe depending on your symptoms, how long it lasts and how much it affects your daily life.

Read more about the psychological, physical and social symptoms of clinical depression

Symptoms of psychosis
Having moments of psychosis (when people lose some contact with reality) means experiencing:

delusions – thoughts or beliefs that are unlikely to be true
hallucinations – hearing and, in some cases, feeling, smelling, seeing or tasting things that are not there; hearing voices is a common hallucination
The delusions and hallucinations almost always reflect the person's deeply depressed mood – for example, they may become convinced they're to blame for something, or that they've committed a crime.

"Psychomotor agitation" is also common. This means not being able to relax or sit still, and constantly fidgeting.

At the other extreme, a person with psychotic depression may have "psychomotor retardation", where both their thoughts and physical movements slow down.

People with psychotic depression have an increased risk of thinking about suicide.

What causes psychotic depression?
The cause of psychotic depression is not fully understood. It's known that there's no single cause of depression and it has many different triggers.

Genes probably play a part, as severe depression can run in families.

Life events and personal circumstances can be the cause for some people. This can include bereavement, relationship problems, financial problems, health problems and recent or past traumatic experiences.

It's not known why some people with severe depression also develop psychosis.

Read more about the causes of clinical depression

Treating psychotic depression
Treatment for psychotic depression involves:

medicine – a combination of antipsychotics and antidepressants can help relieve the symptoms of psychosis
talking therapies – the 1-to-1 talking therapy cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) has proved effective in helping some people with severe depression, including those with psychosis
social support – support with social needs, such as education, employment or accommodation
The person may need to stay in hospital for a short period of time while they're receiving treatment.

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) may sometimes be recommended if the person has severe depression and other treatments, including antidepressants, have not worked. The mental health charity Mind has more information on ECT.

Treatment is usually effective, but follow-up appointments so that the person can be closely monitored are usually required.

Getting help for others
People with psychosis are often unaware that they're thinking and acting strangely.

As a result of this lack of insight, it's often down to the person's friends, relatives or carers to seek help for them.

If you're concerned about someone and think they may have psychosis, you could contact their social worker or mental health team if they've previously been diagnosed with a mental health condition.

Contact the person's GP if this is the first time they've shown symptoms of psychosis.

If you think the person's symptoms are placing them or others at possible risk of harm you can:

take them to your nearest accident and emergency (A&E) department, if they agree
call a GP or use an NHS urgent and emergency care service
call 999 to ask for an ambulance

Overview - Schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is a long-term mental health condition. It causes a range of different psychological symptoms.

Doctors often describe schizophrenia as a type of psychosis. This means the person may not always be able to distinguish their own thoughts and ideas from reality.

Symptoms of schizophrenia can include:

hallucinations – hearing or seeing things that do not exist outside of the mind
delusions – unusual beliefs not based on reality
muddled thoughts and speech based on hallucinations or delusions
losing interest in everyday activities
not wanting to look after yourself and your needs, such as not caring about your personal hygiene
wanting to avoid people, including friends
feeling disconnected from your feelings or emotions
People with schizophrenia do not have a split personality. Schizophrenia does not usually cause someone to be violent.

When to get medical advice
If you're experiencing symptoms of schizophrenia, see a GP as soon as possible. The earlier schizophrenia is treated, the better.

There's no single test for schizophrenia. It's usually diagnosed after an assessment by a mental health care professional, such as a psychiatrist.

Causes of schizophrenia
The exact cause of schizophrenia is unknown. But most experts believe the condition is caused by a combination of genetic and environmental factors.

It's thought that some people are more vulnerable to developing schizophrenia, and certain situations can trigger the condition such as a stressful life event or drug misuse.

Treating schizophrenia
Schizophrenia is usually treated with a combination of medicine and therapy tailored to each individual.

In most cases, this will be antipsychotic medicines and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT).

People with schizophrenia usually receive help from a community mental health team, which can offer day-to-day support and treatment, depending on the needs of each individual.

Many people recover from schizophrenia, although they may have periods when symptoms return (relapses).

Support and treatment can help reduce the impact the condition has on daily life.

Living with schizophrenia
If schizophrenia is well managed, it's possible to reduce the chance of severe relapses.

This can include:

recognising the signs of an acute episode
taking medicine as prescribed
talking to others about the condition
There are many charities and support groups offering help and advice on living with schizophrenia.

Most people find it comforting talking to others with a similar condition.

Social anxiety (social phobia)
Social anxiety disorder, also called social phobia, is a long-term and overwhelming fear of social situations.

It's a common problem that usually starts during the teenage years. It can be very distressing and have a big impact on your life.

For some people it gets better as they get older. But for many people it does not go away on its own without treatment.

It's important to get help if you are having symptoms. There are treatments that can help you manage it.

Symptoms of social anxiety
Social anxiety is more than shyness. It's a fear that does not go away and affects everyday activities, self confidence, relationships and work or school life.

Many people occasionally worry about social situations, but someone with social anxiety feels overly worried before, during and after them.

You may have social anxiety if you:

worry about everyday activities, such as meeting strangers, starting conversations, speaking on the phone, working or shopping
avoid or worry a lot about social activities, such as group conversations, eating with company and parties
always worry about doing something you think is embarrassing, such as blushing, sweating or appearing incompetent
find it difficult to do things when others are watching – you may feel like you're being watched and judged all the time
fear being criticised, avoid eye contact or have low self-esteem
often have symptoms like feeling sick, sweating, trembling or a pounding heartbeat (palpitations)
have panic attacks, where you have an overwhelming sense of fear and anxiety, usually only for a few minutes
Many people with social anxiety also have other mental health issues, such as depression, generalised anxiety disorder or panic disorder.

When to get help for social anxiety
It's a good idea to see a GP if you think you have social anxiety, especially if it's having a big impact on your life.

It's a common problem and there are treatments that can help.

Asking for help can be difficult, but a GP will be aware that many people struggle with social anxiety and will try to put you at ease.

They'll ask you about your feelings, behaviours and symptoms to find out about your anxiety in social situations.

If they think you could have social anxiety, you'll be referred to a mental health specialist to have a full assessment and talk about treatments.

You can also refer yourself directly to an NHS talking therapies service without a referral from a GP.

Find an NHS talking therapies service
Things you can try to overcome social anxiety
Self-help can help reduce social anxiety and you might find it a useful first step before trying other treatments.

The following tips may help:

try to understand more about your anxiety – by thinking about or writing down what goes through your mind and how you behave in certain social situations, it can help to keep a diary
try some relaxation techniques, such as breathing exercises for stress
break down challenging situations into smaller parts and work on feeling more relaxed with each part
try to focus on what people are saying rather than just assuming the worst

Stress
Most people feel stressed sometimes and some people find stress helpful or even motivating. But if stress is affecting your life, there are things you can try that may help.

Support is also available if you're finding it hard to cope with stress.

Symptoms of stress
Stress can cause many different symptoms. It might affect how you feel physically, mentally and also how you behave.

It's not always easy to recognise when stress is the reason you're feeling or acting differently.

Physical symptoms
headaches or dizziness
muscle tension or pain
stomach problems
chest pain or a faster heartbeat
sexual problems
Mental symptoms
difficulty concentrating
struggling to make decisions
feeling overwhelmed
constantly worrying
being forgetful
Changes in behaviour
being irritable and snappy
sleeping too much or too little
eating too much or too little
avoiding certain places or people
drinking or smoking more
Things you can try to help with stress
Do
try talking about your feelings to a friend, family member or health professional. You could also contact Samaritans, call: 116 123 or email: jo@samaritans.org if you need someone to talk to

find out more about 10 stress busters – including getting started with exercise and setting aside time for yourself

use easy time-management techniques to help you take control

use calming breathing exercises

plan ahead for stressful days or events – planning long journeys or making a list of things to remember can really help

consider peer support, where people use their experiences to help each other. Find out more about peer support on the Mind website

listen to free mental wellbeing audio guides

Don’t
do not try to do everything at once – set small targets you can easily achieve

do not focus on the things you cannot change – focus your time and energy into helping yourself feel better

try not to tell yourself that you're alone – most people feel stressed at some point in their life and support is available

try not to use alcohol, cigarettes, gambling or drugs to relieve stress – these can all contribute to poor mental health

Causes of stress
Stress is usually a reaction to mental or emotional pressure. It's often related to feeling like you're losing control over something, but sometimes there's no obvious cause.

When you're feeling anxious or scared, your body releases stress hormones such as adrenaline and cortisol.

This can be helpful for some people and stress might help you get things done or feel more motivated.

But it might also cause physical symptoms such as a faster heartbeat or sweating. If you're stressed all the time it can become a problem.

Identifying the cause
If you know what's causing your stress it might be easier to find ways to manage it.

Some examples of things that may cause stress include:

work – feeling pressure at work, unemployment or retirement
family – relationship difficulties, divorce or caring for someone
financial problems – unexpected bills or borrowing money
health – illness, injury or losing someone (bereavement)
Even significant life events such as buying a house, having a baby or planning a wedding could lead to feelings of stress.

You might find it hard to explain to people why you feel this way, but talking to someone could help you find a solution.



